[Docs] Well Lit Paths Doc (#1156)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/wip-docs-new/well-lit-paths/intelligent-inference-scheduling.md

The **Endpoint Picker (EPP)** replaces naive load balancing with LLM-aware scheduling. It scores each candidate model server using real-time signals and routes each request to the best available pod. The scoring pipeline chains weighted plugins -- `prefix-cache-scorer`, `queue-depth-scorer`, `kv-cache-utilization-scorer` -- with configurable weights (default 2:2:1). The EPP connects to the Gateway via Envoy's ext-proc protocol on port 9002, receives the prompt, evaluates the pipeline, and returns the selected pod address. An **InferencePool** CRD defines the set of model server pods via label selectors, and an **HTTPRoute** CRD binds the Gateway to the InferencePool.

## Architecture

### Prefix-Aware Routing

![Prefix-Aware Routing](./images/prefix-aware-routing.svg)

> The EPP maintains a view of each pod's prefix-cache state. When a request arrives, it identifies which pod already holds the matching prefix in KV-cache and routes the request there, skipping prompt recomputation entirely. The default mode uses an **approximate prefix-cache scorer** that observes request traffic patterns and maintains a probabilistic hash of cached blocks per server (configurable block size: 64 tokens, LRU capacity: 31,250 entries per server). For workloads with high prefix sharing -- RAG pipelines, multi-tenant deployments with shared system prompts -- a **precise prefix-cache scorer** replaces estimation with exact knowledge by pulling real-time KV-cache state from vLLM via KV-Events (ZMQ on port 5557).

Reviewer: I think configuration/technical details like `(configurable block size: 64 tokens, LRU capacity: 31,250 entries per server)` and `(ZMQ on port 5557)` should be dropped

# Intelligent Inference Scheduling

Traditional HTTP requests are fast, uniform, and cheap. Standard round-robin routing strategies balance this load well.

LLM requests break all three assumptions. They are:
* **Multi-turn** - conversations and agentic tool loops send the same growing prefix repeatedly
* **Slow** - a single request can take over a minute generating tokens
* **Non-uniform** - range from 1000s of reasoning tokens to a 100k+ context tokens

llm-d's EPP injects awareness of the LLM-workload into the load-balancing layer considering **prefix-cache affinity** and **realtime server load metrics**.

## Deploy

See the [Intelligent Inference Scheduling guide](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/tree/main/guides/inference-scheduling) for manifests and step-by-step deployment.

> ## Architecture

Reviewer 2: This describes a specific approach to both prefix- and load-aware routing, one thing I learned from Mistral is that they find model server and request agnostic approaches to be useful in some cases. They don't want the scheduler to assume that it can probe the servers, and they don't want the scheduler to make any assumptions about how to parse the request. For prefix-cache aware scheduling, they use session affinity. For load-aware, they use active requests count. 

Given that, do you think it is worth it to rephrase the two paragraphs to indicate that there are multiple options to achieve each?

Reviewer 3: I think we can reference the configuration docs via a [!NOTE], I dont think it makes sense to describe multiple options since this is a "well-lit path" about the specific manifests being deployed

Reviewer 3: addressed.

> ### Prefix-Aware Routing

Reviewer 2: Should we align on request scheduling instead of routing?

![Prefix-Aware Routing](./images/prefix-aware-routing.svg)

> EPP maintains a view of each pod's prefix-cache state in memory. When a request arrives, it identifies which pod already holds the matching prefix in KV-cache and routes the request there. For multi-turn workloads, this optimization is critical to avoid excessive recomputation in a scale-out setting.

Reviewer 2: We aligned on the term endpoint in the inference scheduler instead of pod; this is because a pod may run more than one endpoint in DP mode.

Reviewer 3: addressed

> EPP maintains a approximated view of each pod's prefix-cache state in memory. When a request arrives, it identifies which pod already holds the matching prefix in KV-cache and routes the request there. For multi-turn workloads, this optimization is critical to avoid excessive recomputation in a scale-out setting.

Reviewer: I think you can stick to prefix-cache aware and avoid approximate/precise. These are lower-level terms we created to distinguish between the different approaches.

### Load-Aware Routing

![Load-Aware Routing](./images/load-aware-routing.svg)

> EPP continuously probes each pod's metrics via a PodMonitor scraping `/metrics` at 50ms intervals. It scores pods on queue depth, running requests, and KV-cache utilization to route requests to the pod with the lowest load, avoiding hotspots caused by heterogeneous request patterns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EPP continuously probes each pod's metrics by scraping `/metrics` at a regular interval (50ms default). It scores pods on queue depth, running requests, and KV-cache utilization to schedule requests to the endpoint with the lowest load, avoiding hotspots caused by heterogeneous request patterns.
```

Reviewer 3: addressed
